---
title: Primitives of a relational database
slug: primitives-of-a-relational-database
description: The basic building blocks of a relational database
---

# Primitives of a relational database

## Tables

Tables in a database represents a type of data. It holds all the records of that type. A common example is users. Another example is 'posts' for a blog or 'products' for a webshop.

A fundamental attribute of the relation database is the ability to bind pieces of data together. This can mostly be done using base relations (regular tables). But sometimes it's necessary to create an intermediate table that just holds information about rows from other tables. This can also be described as an associative table.

## Rows

Now we know that a database has many tables and a table is a collection of each instance of a relation. So how are each of these instances stored in the table? The answer to that is rows.

Each row in a table is a record. That means that all the information about that record is stored in a single row.

An important attribute or rows is that they must be unique in that table. This is so it's possible to retrieve the record again at a later point. If two rows were the same it would not be possible to retrieve one of the records.

## Columns

Each table has rows which represent pieces of data. But each table also has columns. The columns represent the attributes that each record must have to complete 1 piece of information.

The 'users' table could have the following columns: id, name, email and password.

That means that each user if in the system would have an id, a name, an email and a password.

Each column has their own data type. Some of the most common data types are:

String - For a short text, like an email
Text - For a longer text, like the contents of an article
Boolean - For true/false values, like whether a user has activated their email
Integer - For numbers, like the price of a product
Date - For storing timestamps, like when a user signed up
Json - For storing json values

In the example of the 'users' table there was an 'id' column. It's a common practice to give each row a unique id. This is because each record must be unique, and thus giving each row a unique attribute will make them unique.
Many database systems has a feature that will auto increment this id when new records are added.

## Keys

### Primary keys

Each row in a table has a primary key. The key is the attributes that make the row unique. This means the key can be used to retrieve that record from the database.

Many tables will just use an 'id' integer as the key. This is a simple approach and will work for most tables. But sometimes it's necessary to make multiple attributes the key.

This often happens in intermediate tables. Here a unique key could be 'user_id' and 'post_id'. This means that two records can't have both the same user_id and the same post_id.

### Foreign keys

Foreign keys are not primary keys and don't necessarily need to be unique. A foreign key is simply an attribute that references the primary key on another table. This is how tables are bound together in a database.

A good example is the intermediate table described in the section above. The 'user_id' attribute is a foreign key because it references the 'id' attribute on the 'users' table. The same is the case with 'post_id'. Together the two attributes make up the primary key while each of them is a foreign key.

It's not a requirement that the foreign key is part of the primary key. Another way to make each row unique in the intermediate table is to simply add a 'id' attribute to the table and make that the primary key.
