---
title: Relationships
slug: relationships
description: Connect data from different tables
type: Article
---

# Relationships

A relationship exists when two tables are bound together. This is done through foreign keys. This is useful because it's rare that a piece of data is useful without any context.

## Example

If you make a post on Facebook a record will be saved in the 'posts' table. But the system needs to know that the post was created by you. Therefore the post might have a 'user_id' attribute. You can say that the post belongs to the user.

This way it's possible to query the database for all posts made by a user.

## Relationship types

There are several ways that tables can be connected. Sometimes a record might be connected to multiple records in another table. Sometimes it might just be a single record in another table.

### One to one

The one to one relationship means that two records are connected to each other and only each other. 'Record A' in 'Table A' is connection to 'Record B' in 'Table B' and the other way around.

On Facebook it's only possible for a user to have 1 cover image. Let's say they have a 'users' table and a 'cover_images' table.

The 'users' table would have a 'cover_image_id' column and the 'cover_images' table would have a 'user_id' column.

### One to many

The one to many relationship means that one record can be connected to multiple records in another table. 'Record A' in 'Table A' is connected to 'Record B' in 'Table B' and 'Record C' in 'Table C'.

On Facebook a user can make many posts. There is a 'users' table and a 'posts' table. The 'posts' table would have a 'user_id' column but not the other way around. That means that multiple records in the 'posts' table could have the same 'user_id'.

### Many to many

The many to many relationship means that multiple records can be connected to multiple other records and vice versa. 'Record A' in 'Table A' can be connection to 'Record B' and 'Record C' in 'Table B'. And 'Record B' in 'Table B' is connected to both 'Record A' and 'Record B' in 'Table A'.

On Facebook users can join groups. And groups contain multiple different users. There is a 'users' table and a 'groups' table. In this case we can't add 'group_id' to the 'users' table because that would mean the user could only join 1 group. Similarly we can't add 'user_id' to the 'groups' table because that would mean each group could only have 1 user.

This is where intermediate tables are used. In addition to the 'users' table and the 'groups' table a third table called 'users_groups' is made. This table would have a 'user_id' and a 'post_id'. Since a user can only join a group once these two attributes are the primary key as well.

### Polymorphic relationships

In the previous example we assumed that a relationship will always between 2 tables. But there are cases where that's not true.

On Facebook you can comment on both text posts and videos. In this example there is a 'comments' table a 'posts' table and a 'videos' table. Records in the 'comments' table can be connected to a record in either the 'posts' table or the 'videos' table.

The 'comments' table can't have a 'posts_id' because the attribute might refer to a video. Instead the attribute could be called 'parent_id'. This is a more generic word that refers to both 'posts' and 'videos'. But it's also necessary to store information about which table 'parent_id' refers to on each record. This could be done in another attribute called 'parent_type'.

Each record in the comments table would have a 'parent_type' which would be either 'post' or 'video' and a 'parent_id' that would be the foreign key to that table.
