---
title: Advanced conditions
slug: advanced-conditions
description: Using operators in SQL
type: Article
---

# Advanced conditions

So far all the conditions we've used have been really simple. We've only compared the value of a specific column to a specific value.

```
WHERE id = 2;
```

In SQL there are many ways to enhance conditions to make them more granular.

## Operators

So far we've only used the equal to operator (`=`). But SQL has many comparison operators that other programming languages does.

Examples are greater than `>`, less than or equal `<=` or not equal `<>`.

```
SELECT * FROM users WHERE age >= 30;
```

This query selects all rows in the users table that has an age value of 30 or higher.

SQL also has arithmetic operators like add and subtract.

```
SELECT * FROM users WHERE birth_year % 4 = 0;
```

This query selects all users that are born in a leap year.

## And

The `AND` keyword is used to filter rows based on multiple conditions.

```
SELECT * FROM users WHERE age < 20 AND country = 'Denmark';
```

This query returns all records where the age is lower than 20 and the country is 'Denmark'.

## Or

The `OR` keyword is used to filter rows based on multiple conditions but where only one of the conditions has to be fulfilled.

```
SELECT * FROM users WHERE age < 20 OR age > 35;
```

This query returns all users are under 20 or over 35 years.

## Not

The `NOT` keyword is used to filter records based on a false condition.

```
SELECT * FROM users WHERE NOT country = 'Denmark';
```

This selects all users that are not from Denmark.

## In

The `IN` keyword is used to check the value of a column against multiple possible values.

```
SELECT * FROM users WHERE country IN ('Denmark', 'Sweden', 'Norway');
```

This query selects all Scandinavian users.

The previous query is equivalent to the following query:

```
SELECT * FROM users WHERE country = 'Denmark' OR country = 'Sweden' OR country = 'Norway';
```

## Between

The `BETWEEN` keyword can be used to filter records based on ranges. These rangers can be either numbers, text or dates.

```
SELECT * FROM users WHERE 'created_at' BETWEEN '2020-01-01' AND '2020-03-31';
```

This query returns all records that have been created between two dates.

## Like

The `LIKE` keyword can be used to filter records on partial values. The `%` can be used as a wildcard in a pattern.

```
SELECT * FROM users WHERE name LIKE 's%';
```

This query selects all records where the name starts with 's'.

This can be very useful for finding records based on a user search query.

## Exists

The `EXISTS` keyword makes it possible to run a sub query and return a boolean based on whether the sub query returned any records. This can then be used to filter the main query with.

```
SELECT * FROM users WHERE EXISTS (
    SELECT id FROM comments WHERE comments.user_id = users.id
);
```

This query returns all records in the users table that have a related record in the comments table with that users id. In simple terms it returns all users who has left a comment at some point.

## Having

The `HAVING` keyword is similar to the `WHERE` clause but can be used on groups returned by `GROUP BY` and can use aggregate functions.

```
SELECT * FROM users
GROUP BY country
HAVING AVG(age) > 20;
```

This query group all users by country but only return the groups where the average age is more than 20.
