---
title: Stored procedures
slug: stored-procedures
description: Creating functions in SQL
type: Article
---

# Stored procedures

A stored procedure is a SQL statement that is saved and can be executed later. In a stored procedure it's possible to create logic like if/else statements that aren't otherwise possible in SQL. This creates the opportunity to move some business logic to the database layer.

Conceptually stored procedures can be thought of as functions from other programming languages. In Postgres stored procedures are called functions. In this lesson we'll use Postgres as an example.

```
CREATE FUNCTION insert_user(name text, email text, password text)
LANGUAGE sql
AS $$
    INSERT INTO users (name, email, password)
    VALUES (name, email, password)
$$
```

In the example above we define a function called `insert_user`. It takes three parameters: name, email and password. They are all of the data type `text`.

Next we define the language that will be used in the function. In this case it's just sql but for Postgres it could also be plpgsql.

After that we have the `AS` keyword and to sets of `$$`. What's inside the dollar signs is the function body.

In the function body we normal regular SQL statements. In this case we are inserting into the users table, in the fields name, email and password and with the values of our parameters.

The function can now be used using the `CALL` keyword:

```
CALL insert_user('Todd', 'test@example.com', 'password');
```

## Benefits of stored procedures

A huge benefit of stored procedures is the ability to reuse queries. When queries are abstracted away in a procedure it can also make it simpler to read if it's a complicated query.

Abstracting away logic has another benefit. The query can now be changed and optimised in one place as long as it keeps the same function signature.

Saving stored procedures in the database has the added benefit of a performance boost. This is because the database system doesn't have to parse the SQL statement coming from the application.

Another added benefit is the ability to set permissions for stored procedures. This increases security if there are certain critical procedures that should only be allowed to be run by certain users.
