---
title: Installing PostgreSQL on MacOS
slug: installing-postgresql-on-macos
description: Installing Postgres using Homebrew
---

# Installing PostgreSQL on Mac

There are several different ways to install Postgres on a Mac system.

Third-party providers have created [installers](https://www.enterprisedb.com/downloads/postgres-postgresql-downloads) that will take care of the setup for you.

In this lesson we are gonna use Homebrew to install it.

## Installing Homebrew

Homebrew is a package manager for MacOS. It has a large collection of commonly used software for MacOS. Using Homebrew makes it trivial to keep track of installed software and keep it updated. To interact with Homebrew you must use the Terminal.

Open the Terminal app on MacOS. Then paste in the following command to install Homebrew:

```
/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/master/install.sh)"
```

To test that Homebrew has been install run the following command:

```
brew -v
```

If you get an output similar to the following it has been installed:

```
Homebrew 2.2.10
Homebrew/homebrew-core (git revision c57ea; last commit 2020-03-18)
Homebrew/homebrew-cask (git revision 26cb8; last commit 2020-03-19)
```

## Installing Postgres

Homebrew has a large directory of 'formulae' or packages in it's directory. One of them is [postgresql](https://formulae.brew.sh/formula/postgresql).

To install it run the following command:

```
brew install postgresql
```

Now Postgres should be installed. It has also created an admin user, using the MacOS username.

## Using Postgres

To start using Postgres run the following command:

```
brew services start postgresql
```

This will tell Homebrew to run Postgres.

After this you can go back to the Terminal and run the following command:

```
psql postgres
```

This should open the interactive Postgres shell and you are ready to start using it.
