---
title: What is database normalisation?
slug: what-is-database-normalisation
description: Avoid inconsistent data in a database.
---

# What is database normalisation?

Database normalisation is the process of eliminating abnormal or inconsistent data from a database. There are different stages of normalisation and every time you reach the criteria of the next level you achieved a new form.

Normalising is restructuring the database so that you reduce redundant data storage and improve the overall integrity of the data.

## Anomalies

When a query is made to a database there are three types of anomalies that can occur.

### Insertion anomaly

If your table is designed in such a way that new records cannot be added because there might be information on the record that can only be added at a later point.

We have a users table with the following columns: id, name, email, password, team_name.

When creating new records in the table, users might not have been assigned a team yet. The only way to create new records in this table is to leave the team_name with a null value and then update it at a later point.

### Update anomaly

If your table is designed in such a way that in order to update a single attribute on a record requires updating multiple records, because the same data is stored on multiple records.

We have a user_articles table with the following columns: id, user_name, user_email, article_title, article_content.

For each article the user has in the table their user_name and user_email is duplicated. If the user ever were to change their user name or email each record in this table would have to be update to reflect the change.

## Deletion anomaly

If your table is designed in such a way that removing a single piece of data requires removing other data that wasn't supposed to be deleted.

We have a users table with the following columns: id, name, email, password, team_name.

If the user is no longer part of the same team, but still exists in the system we would have to delete the entire record.

## Unnormalised form

If any of the anomalies above occurs in the design of a database the database is in the unnormalised form.
